---
layout: post
title: 'Cube^2: Hypercube - Movie Review'
date: '2005-05-12 08:40:00'
---

<p><a href="http://imdb.com/title/tt0285492/" target="_blank">The movie</a>&rsquo;s about seven people trapped in a cube with no idea how they got there and no idea what they&rsquo;re supposed to be doing or how to get out. It seems a simple enough analogy of the existential problem, but treated with a depth of understanding and thought that is definitely above par. One of the seven is a mathematician. He starts off numbering the rooms but as he finds ever increasingly complex numbers, he develops increasingly complex methods and equations to try and make sense of them. It&rsquo;s a very trippy take on randomness, a concept that has somehow, randomly I suppose, managed to work its way into my reading these days.<br/>
 What I found most impressive about the film was the very tight canvas the writer has given himself. One cube. Some people. He can&rsquo;t introduce things at will and so each incident has to not only drive the story forward within this austere space, but at the same time be interesting because with a concept like this, it&rsquo;s the easiest thing in the world to bore your audiences to death.<br/>
 And in this small canvas, the writer has managed to talk about Nazi Germany, relationships, philosphy, many many things that I can&rsquo;t remember now by just refering to them in the most oblique way. I have to watch this movie again. It&rsquo;s on Star Movies these days but late at night. The best part? No commercial breaks! Though not so good if you&rsquo;re (as I was) having a beer with the movie.<br/>
Also, this is a remake of <a href="http://imdb.com/title/tt0123755/" target="_blank">Cube</a>, the makers of which sadly have very slim credits but I&rsquo;d be really interested in seeing what else they might have to offer. Guess there&rsquo;s always <a href="http://imdb.com/title/tt0377713/" target="_blank">this one</a>.</p>

<p>The movie is on again at 1:00 PM Tuesday, May 17, 2005 and 3:00 AM Sunday, May 29, 2005. The <a href="http://starmovies.indya.com" target="_blank">Star Movies website</a> has a nice &ldquo;Remind Me&rdquo; feature, but it doesn&rsquo;t seem to work.</p>