---
layout: post
title: My day
date: '2006-08-02 16:01:00'
---

Each morning same story.

Wake up. Cock an eye at the clock.<br/>
Panic, then realise its not late at all,<br/> 
close eyeszzz.z&hellip;.zzz&hellip;..<br/>

Open eyes, panic! It&rsquo;s late!<br/>
Rush, rush, brush, flush.<br/>
Pack laptop, pop tap locks, take helmet<br/>
 and bike past fellows well met<br/>
but who I don&rsquo;t like,<br/>
out the door and into the street.<br/>

Automatic doors slide aside and introduce you to the heat.<br/>
H E A T.<br/>
Murder by degrees as one rides,<br/>
alert and watchful with eagle eyes<br/>
and bat ears to hear the shush<br/>
the whispered breath <br/>
of approaching death<br/>
in the form of a mom<br/>
    and Huey, Dewey and Louie<br/>
 in a big fuckoff SUV<br/>
keeping cool on the way to school.<br/>

Sandwiches and traffic jams<br/>
well behaved commuters mutter into cellphones that flip<br/>
and clack back with a whack.<br/>
Fast talking radio show hosts<br/>
    honor the ghosts<br/>
of the dead in Iraq.<br/>
Bluetooths blip plaints and curses through thin air,<br/>
the vapour pulses with despair.<br/>
A woman walks across the parking lot.<br/>
She is black.<br/>

Off the road and cutting short<br/>
through the parking lot<br/>
of the Nassau Coliseum (sic).<br/>

Acres of tarmac with the odd car parked,<br/>
baking,<br/>
the arena with names not its own<br/>
(but not on loan)<br/>
shimmers in a grey and white-lined bleak heat.<br/>
Freak street!<br/>
Fast cars blur the final curve,<br/>
the glass and steel mousewheel towers above.<br/>
The office.<br/>

Cool elevators serve rides and propaganda,<br/>
dinging the floors to the top.<br/>
Below, the freeway races non-stop,<br/>
like bubbles in a pipe.<br/>
Inside the blue light nothing seems right.<br/>
I wish I could disappear, drop out of sight<br/>
and just be by your side.<br/>

 And thats just how it starts, my day.